---
title: "Lecture 8"
permalink: /files/l3/
author_profile: false
---

# Reinforcement Learning

Whatever we discussed so far works nicely, when we can specify all the
states. However, in many practical problems, there could be infinite
states to account for. Thus, it is not possible to know the entire
transition model beforehand. That is, the probability of transitioning
to another state for a given action at the current state could be
unknown. Therefore, the idea that we will find out the optimal policy in
advance is not going to work.

There comes the *Reinforcement Learning*, the idea of explore and learn.
For the strategy of reinforcement learning, we program the agent to
observe rewards as to learn to identify an optimal (or near optimal)
policy in the environment. The agent need not have a complete model of
the environment or have knowledge of the reward function.

## Q-learning Agent

An agent generally must make a trade-off between exploitation to
maximize its current rewards (reflected in expected utility
estimations), versus exploration that contributes to learning the true
model and helps promote long-term well-being. A good strategy carefully
balances this trade-off to maximize long-term expected utility.

In Q-learning, for every state $$s$$, we want to learn about the utility
of an action $$a$$ without knowing the transition model. We can denote a
state-action pair as the tuple $$(s,a)$$. Next, we modify the Bellman
equation to define the Q-function $$Q(s,a)$$.

$$\begin{align*} U(s) & = R(s)+ \gamma \max \limits_{a \in A(s)} \sum \limits_{s'} P(s'\vert s,a)U(s') \\ & = \max \limits_{a \in A(s)} \left(R(s)+ \gamma  \sum \limits_{s'} P(s'\vert s,a)U(s')\right) \\ & = \max \limits_{a \in A(s)} Q(s,a) \end{align*}$$

Where we define $$Q(s,a)$$ to be,

$$\begin{align*} Q(s,a) & =R(s)+ \gamma  \sum \limits_{s'} P(s'\vert s,a)U(s') \\ & = R(s)+ \gamma  \sum \limits_{s'} P(s'\vert s,a)\max \limits_{a' \in A(s')} Q(s',a') \end{align*}$$

The $$Q$$ function can be interpreted as the reward right now plus the
expected utility in the future after taking action $$a$$, assuming
optimal actions are taken in the future.

However, because we do not know the transition model, $$P(s' \vert s,a)$$, we
assume $$P(s' \vert s,a)=1$$ for now to get,

$$ Q(s,a)=R(s)+ \gamma \max \limits_{a' \in A(s')} Q(s',a')  \nonumber$$

However, this assumption tends to overestimate the actual expected
utility in the future. Thus, to compensate for that, each time we update
the agent’s estimate of $$Q$$, that is $$\hat{Q}$$, we weight the new
estimate by $$\alpha$$ and the previous estimate by $$1-\alpha$$.

$$ \hat{Q}(s,a)\leftarrow \alpha \left(R(s)+\gamma \max \limits_{a'} \hat{Q}(s',a')\right)+(1-\alpha)\hat{Q}(s,a)  \nonumber$$

Equivalently, rearranging the terms,

$$ \hat{Q}(s,a)\leftarrow \hat{Q}(s,a) + \alpha \left(R(s)+\gamma \max \limits_{a'} \hat{Q}(s',a') - \hat{Q}(s,a) \right) \nonumber$$

The equation above is also known as the **Bellman update**. Initially,
we want $$\alpha$$ to be high (close to 1) but then tends to 0 with
time. An example of $$\alpha$$ as a function of time is the following.

$$ \alpha(t)=\frac{1}{t} \nonumber$$

$$\alpha$$ can take any function that decreases with input $$t$$. To
make $$\alpha$$ dependent on $$(s,a)$$, we could have a dictionary
$$N(s,a)$$ that tracks how many times the agent has taken action $$a$$
at state $$s$$. We can then define alpha as $$\alpha(N(s,a))$$, where
alpha takes in $$N(s,a)$$ as an input instead of time, but is still
decreasing in $$N(s,a)$$.

## Approximate Q-Learning

One fundamental weakness of Q Learning is that it may require the agent
to store numerous tuples of state-action combinations, and iterate over
them many times to learn how to ‘play the game’. This can be infeasible
for more complex games such as chess which as $$10^4$$ possible states
(not even considering actions), or even real world problems.

To reduce the state-action space, we attempt to project the problem onto
some other space that is based on features instead. Let function
$$f_i(s,a)$$ denote a feature $$i$$ of state $$s$$ and action $$a$$ that
returns some numerical value. For example, features for chess could be
the number pawns, rooks or bishops. We now define a $$Q$$ function that
is an approximate function of the original $$Q$$ function, as a weighted
linear function of the features.

$$ Q(s,a)=\sum \limits_{i=1}^n f_i(s,a)w_i \nonumber$$

Thus, in the Approximate Q-Learning algorithm, we no longer need to
store a huge dictionary of $$\hat{Q}$$ values for each state and action.
Rather, with some predefined functions $$f_i$$ corresponding to each
estimated weight $$\hat{w_i}$$ for all $$i\in [1,n]$$, we can compute
$$\hat{Q}$$ with the following function.

$$\hat{Q}(s,a)=\sum \limits_{i=1}^n f_i(s,a)\hat{w_i} \nonumber$$

Moreover, instead of directly updating $$\hat{Q}$$ values at each
iteration, the weights are updated instead.

$$\hat{w_i} \leftarrow \hat{w_i} + \alpha \left( R(s) + \gamma \max \limits_{a'} \hat{Q}(s',a')-\hat{Q}(s,a)\right) \frac{\partial \hat{Q}(s,a)}{\partial \hat{w_i}} \nonumber$$

For the case where $$Q(s,a)$$ is defined as a weighted linear function
of features,

$$\frac{\partial \hat{Q}(s,a)}{\partial \hat{w_i}}=f_i(s,a) \nonumber$$

For the Q-Learning algorithm, we make the assumption that the agent has
access to the functions $$f_1(s,a),f_2(s,a), \cdots f_n(s,a)$$, as well
as weights $$\hat{w_1},\hat{w_2},\cdots,\hat{w_n}$$ in addition to the
data structures discussed before. The dictionary $$\hat{Q}[s]$$ is now
only used to store the terminal state and the associated rewards.
Naturally, the more useful parameters (or features) we include, the
better the approximation of the true utility. But more parameters also
increase the computational complexity as a cost.
